Rewrite the Simple Cipher description. (#2565)
exercism/problem-specifications: exercises/simple-cipher/description.md

# Description

Create an implementation of the [Vigenère cipher][wiki].
The Vigenère cipher is a simple substitution cipher.

## Cipher terminology

A cipher is an algorithm used to encrypt, or encode, a string.
The unencrypted string is called the _plaintext_ and the encrypted string is called the _ciphertext_.
Converting plaintext to ciphertext is called _encoding_ while the reverse is called _decoding_.

> In a _substitution cipher_, each letter is replaced with a different letter which is computed with the help of a _key_.

Reviewer: Based on the explanation below, the new letter can also be the same letter, right?
```suggestion
In a _substitution cipher_, each letter is replaced with another letter, computed with the help of a _key_.
```

Author: Correct. The mapping doesn't always change the value. I'm not sure that "another" is much more clear than "different". If this sentence is confusing, we could call it out explicitly.

```suggestion
In a _substitution cipher_, each plaintext letter is replaced with a ciphertext letter which is computed with the help of a _key_. (Note, it is possible for replacement letter to be the same as the original letter! As mentioned earlier, an `"a"` in the key means there is no shift/change.)
```

## Encoding details

> In this cipher, the key is a series of lowercase letters, such as `"abcd"`.

Reviewer: Should it mention that letters are from the Latin alphabet, so that it's consistent with the random keys?
```suggestion
In this cipher, the key is a series of lowercase letters from the Latin alphabet, such as `"abcd"`.
```

Author: We could, but ... I'm not sure it's needed. I think it's obvious enough from the context and we already mention the Latin alphabet. Do you feel the description needs to mention it to be more clear/less confusing

Reviewer: Once someone reads the section about random keys, they'll already know what the alphabet is. So it's clear enough as it is.

The suggestion is purely for consistency, and I don't even have a strong opinion on it. It can also stay as it is, I guess :)

An `"a"` in the key means a shift of 0 (that is, no shift).
A `"b"` in the key means a shift of 1.
A `"c"` in the key means a shift of 2, and so on.

The first letter of the plaintext uses the first letter of the key, the second letter of the plaintext uses the second letter of the key and so on.
If you run out of letters in the key before you run out of letters in the plaintext, start over from the start of the key again.

If the key only contains one letter, such as `"dddddd"`, then all letters of the plaintext are shifted by the same amount (three in this example), which would make this the same as a rotational cipher or shift cipher (sometimes called a Caesar cipher).
For example, the plaintext `"iamapandabear"` would become `"ldpdsdqgdehdu"`.

If the key only contains the letter `"a"` (one or more times), the shift distance is zero and the ciphertext is the same as the plaintext.

Usually the key is more complicated than that, though!
If the key is `"abcd"` then letters of the plaintext would be shifted by a distance of 0, 1, 2 then 3.
Using that key, `"hello"` would become `"hfnoo"`.

## Random keys

> If no key is provided, generate a key which consists of at least 100 random lowercase letters from the Latin alphabet.

Author: It's an arbitrary requirement. There's no reason it needs to be "at least 100" vs "exactly 75" or "50 to 100".

The prior description included "at least 100" so I carried that over.

I don't see anything in the test data that enforces this, so I think it would be fine to change this requirement ... but I would suggest making that part of a separate discussion/PR. This PR rewrites the description without altering the requirements.

> If no key is provided, generate a key which consists of at least 100 random lowercase letters from the Latin alphabet.

Reviewer 2: Okay, thanks. I was just curious.

Each letter of the plaintext is _shifted_ or _rotated_ by a distance based on a corresponding letter in the key.
An `"a"` in the key means a shift of 0 (that is, no shift).
A `"b"` in the key means a shift of 1.
A `"c"` in the key means a shift of 2, and so on.

The first letter of the plaintext uses the first letter of the key, the second letter of the plaintext uses the second letter of the key and so on.
If you run out of letters in the key before you run out of letters in the plaintext, start over from the start of the key again.

If the key only contains one letter, such as `"dddddd"`, then all letters of the plaintext are shifted by the same amount (three in this example), which would make this the same as a rotational cipher or shift cipher (sometimes called a Caesar cipher).
For example, the plaintext `"iamapandabear"` would become `"ldpdsdqgdehdu"`.

If the key only contains the letter `"a"` (one or more times), the shift distance is zero and the ciphertext is the same as the plaintext.

Usually the key is more complicated than that, though!
If the key is `"abcd"` then letters of the plaintext would be shifted by a distance of 0, 1, 2 then 3.

> Using that key, `"hello"` would become `"hfnoo"`.

Reviewer: Would it make sense to put this example in its own subsection and show the process in more detail? For instance: "e" is shifted by 1, so it becomes the next letter, "f". "l" is shifted by 2, so it becomes the letter two positions after "l", and so on. For "o", we've run out of key letters, so we start over with "a", and the shift is 0. Basically, just more explanation about how the instructions are applied to the example.

Author: :shrug: 
Either way makes sense. I think this is detailed enough to get students started. Do you think it needs to be more detailed for students to understand the algorithm and solve this exercise?

Author: FWIW no one on the forum asked for more detail here, implicitly suggesting they feel this is sufficiently detailed as is.

Reviewer: > I think this is detailed enough to get students started. Do you think it needs to be more detailed for students to understand the algorithm and solve this exercise?

I agree, this is enough to get started. It's enough for me since I already understand how the algorithm works, and it's probably enough for someone who figures it out from the input and output. So if the goal is for students to work out the algorithm based on the description and tests, then the given instructions are probably sufficient. It really depends on what you have in mind. Personally, I would prefer to see the algorithm in action to make things clearer. Even a simple rephrasing would help:

```If the plaintext is "hello" and the key is "abcd", the letters `h, e, l, l, o` are shifted by `0, 1, 2, 3, 0` positions respectively, resulting in "hfnoo".```

Author: So ... to clarify what you're saying, you specifically would like the example which calls out/shows the part about how the key is repeated?

Reviewer: Both the key repetition and how individual letters are shifted. Basically what the rephrased version shows. It's what you already have, just explained in a little more detail.

Author: How about this?
```
If the key is `"abcd"` then letters of the plaintext would be shifted by a distance of 0, 1, 2, and 3.
If the plaintext is `"hello"`, we need 5 shifts so the key would wrap around, giving shift distances of 0, 1, 2, 3, and 0.
Applying those shifts to the letters of `"hello"` we get `"hfnoo"`.
```

Reviewer: That should be fine 👍

# Description

Create an implementation of the [Vigenère cipher][wiki].
The Vigenère cipher is a simple substitution cipher.

## Cipher terminology

A cipher is an algorithm used to encrypt, or encode, a string.
The unencrypted string is called the _plaintext_ and the encrypted string is called the _ciphertext_.
Converting plaintext to ciphertext is called _encoding_ while the reverse is called _decoding_.

In a _substitution cipher_, each plaintext letter is replaced with a ciphertext letter which is computed with the help of a _key_.
(Note, it is possible for replacement letter to be the same as the original letter!

> As mentioned earlier, an `"a"` in the key means there is no shift/change.)

Reviewer: This is a detail mentioned later rather than earlier. I think it's safe to remove this sentence, since the explanation comes a couple of sentences later.
